Let’s start!
Hello, my name is Thai. I am a
software engineer at Eventpop (Opn).
Today I would like to share an approach
I’m using with various projects.
Both personal and work projects,
To let me develop software fast
while maintaining quality.
I will “move fast” because
I have a lot of slides.
Today’s contents is opinion-based,
formed from my personal experience.
It’s not backed by empirical facts.
There could be many cases
I didn’t think of.
So don’t take this as gospel.
My opinion changes as I learn more.
Today I look at it one way, next month
I might look at it another way.
But still, I hope you find something
useful out of this talk.
I want to talk about this topic because
Sometimes I work on a project
and found that I don’t feel confident
changing or improving the codebase.
I feel unproductive,
and I don’t like that feeling.
Once there was a system that
suddenly worked slowly.
Mobile users find the app janky,
so I went to optimize it.
It’s a React app.
I have to optimize its performance.
I have to refactor and
restructure many parts.
I finished the optimization, but I don't
dare to merge or release it to production
because I'm afraid I may break something.
I have to waste time testing all
the features to gain confidence.
The bigger the project,
the longer it takes to test.
What can help us is: automated testing.
We all know that we should write tests.
I talked to other devs and asked
if they would write a test.
Some people working in the startup said
they didn't have time to write unit tests
because they had to finish
the project in time.
But when we develop without unit tests,
our code may get tangled up.
When we try to write a unit test later,
we may find it to be impossible
unless we refactor the code
so that it’s testable.
But we may not be able to refactor
confidently because there is no test.
Moreover, the higher level tests such as
API tests and UI tests may not be written.
How do we release to production?
If we don't YOLO and hope for the best,
we might have to test them all manually.
Or throw it to another team,
such as QA team.
If you're lucky, the QA team will write
an automated test for you.
But sometimes the automated test can only
be run in the environment of QA.
When we try to run it in localhost,
it may not work.
So the feedback loop may be slow
if there is no automated test to help.
I've read that high-performing teams
should have short feedback loops.
A team should be able to ship things
to production within 15 minutes.
Hence the saying, 15 minutes or bust.
I'm slowly finding my way
to get closer to that point.
If we are in a team with
a mindset about TDD.
“We need tests no matter what,
for our sustainable future.”
It may be easy to get to that point.
But just doing TDD, I think
it requires a lot of investment.
Beginning with education. When I was in
university, I only learned the theory
and just the basic examples
of software testing.
When I had to test real code,
I found that one component renders
hundreds of subcomponents.
We have to prepare the environment
so that all of our components
can run in our testing tool.
Or we have to fix it so that each
component can mock the subcomponents.
It's tiring no matter which way you go.
If it's this hard, how much harder to
convince the team to write tests with you?
And it's not that we can learn to write
good tests in just an hour or two.
I think TDD has a pretty big iceburg.
When I started writing,
my speed dropped a lot.
I had to think about how to test.
Sometimes I wrote a bad test, it slowed
me down instead of getting faster.
Not only it couldn't catch any bug.
It also fails whenever
I restructure my code.
I also had to restructure the tests.
It took me years until I feel that
TDD actually makes me faster.
Some teams just don't have enough
resources to invest in these things.
Sometimes I don't have time to write unit
tests, especially in a very urgent work.
So I had to choose what to do.
If I don't invest in CI/CD testing,
then I have to live in fear.
Everything requires review,
testing, approval, and sign-off.
But even if I can get past that point,
I will find the next stage,
Which is the framework. Sometimes if I
write code according to the standard,
I get a code that can't be unit-tested.
So I have to do integration test instead
and prepare a testing environment.
Or I have to refactor the code
to make it easier to unit test.
For example, I may have to use
the hexagonal architecture.
But when I use it, our code which
was once simple and straightforward —
There are only two classes:
controller and model.
It's now divided into 5 classes.
Break out of the framework’s pattern.
Other people read it and don't understand.
They had to jump 5 files.
But everything can be unit tested.
But I don't know if it's worth it.
There are many trade-offs and there
are many conflicting opinions.
Some recommend testing pyramids.
Some say that pyramids are out and
recommend testing trophies instead.
Some say that end-to-end tests
may not a good idea, so be careful.
Some say that unit tests are not
very helpful, so they don't write.
But at least they seem to all agree
taht testing is a lot of headache.
For this session,
I will talk about my development and
testing philosophy I am using now.
There two key points.
First, I make my software easy to test.
I try to wear a tester's hat.
And if I feel that something is
difficult to test, I fix that.
And so, writing tests will be easier.
When I reach the point where writing tests
is easier than testing by hand,
I believe people will start
writing tests themselves.
Second, if I encounter a bug,
I will cover it with a test first.
It turns out, what worked for me
was not unit testing.
I found that it was black box testing.
Normally, our software is composed
of subcomponents, right?
Controllers, components, utilities, etc.
In white box testing, we take these
components and test them separately.
But in black box testing,
we don't care about what's inside.
We test from the outside.
Isn't this difficult?
Let's go back to the first step,
which is making it easy to test.
Let's look at the pyramid test first.
Actually, there are many
versions of the pyramid.
Let's look at this picture first.
Most of the black box tests
will cover the top of the pyramid.
Such as end-to-end and integration tests.
The top of the pyramid is often
looked at in a negative way.
Because it is slow, easy to break (flaky)
And when it breaks,
we don't know where it breaks.
We have to dive into the code and debug.
So it become a recommendation to do that
less and do a more unit tests.
But many times, developers only write unit
tests and there are no tests for the UI.
Or in some cases, there are unit tests
and all the tests are passed.
But when the program is broken in
production, there are no logs.
Because they believe in
unit tests too much.
Currently, when I go into codebase
and find that there are no tests,
What I'm trying to do now is not
to start writing unit tests anymore.
I will try to test from the UI first.
Some people see me doing this and
wonder why I went this way.
It’s true that unit tests are fast,
reliable and detailed.
But it's not what I wanted at that time.
What I want is confidence.
I want to be sure that there is nothing
broken after changing the code.
Let's look at some code examples.
Let's start with unit tests.
This is from NestJS.
When we write unit tests for NestJS,
Firstly we have to know thier testing
APIs, such as createTestingModule.
We have to learn more about it.
And we have to know which services
our controllers use.
So we can mock the right method.
I won't talk about the
pros and cons of this now.
Let's compare with the black box API test.
I called the API, checked the status
and checked the response.
And that's it. It looks easier, right?
But you might notice...
What if our database is empty,
Wouldn't the test fail?
Or if the DB already contains other
data, wouldn’t the tests also fail?
Yes, and we have to fix it.
The way I fixed it is:
I created another API endpoint.
To prepare data in the database.
When we call this API, the database
will have the data ready to test.
Now, you may also notice...
When I call this API, wouldn't
all existing data get deleted?
Or if the API doesn't clear the data,
wouldn’t the data get all mixed up?
If we run many tests at the same time,
wouldn’t they interfere each other?
Yes, and we have to fix that too.
I fixed it by making my system handle
many environments in the same instance.
Each environment’s data are isolated.
That is, I make the system multi-tenant.
When we call the API, the API
will create a new environment.
And we use the created
environment ID in our test.
Now, every test will have
its own environment.
This will prevent the test data from
being mixed up with other data.
In addition, it will allow us to run
many tests at the same time.
If we make our app easy to test,
it will be easier to write tests.
I often hear that UI tests and
end-to-end tests are difficult to write.
Which is true.
If we don't make our app easy to test,
it will be difficult to test.
Especially if the app writer and the
test writer are different people.
Or they are in a different team or company
and they don’t work together closely,
yeah, it’s gonna be quite hard.
But if we use the tester’s hat
while we are developing,
or work closely with testers or QAs,
it will be easier for both sides.
I see that in some companies, QA and devs
are regularly pair-programming.
In other fields, like game arcades,
if we use the key to open the coin slot,
there will be a service button behind it.
When we press it,
we will see the test menu.
It will make testing easier. No need to
bring a cabinet back to the factory.
Many phones have a secret number.
When we enter it, we’ll see a test menu.
We can do the same with our app.
We can put developer tools
or testing tools in our app.
Mobile apps can do the same.
We can put test pages and endpoints.
Don't forget to protect those endpoints.
For example, in the app I developed,
I put a test menu in the app.
I can test the components
without having to open the storybook.
Here I built a web-based game,
I added another page.
When I press it, it will show
the result immediately.
I can develop that page without
having to play the game every time.
This page is connected to the backend.
But it will be a test environment.
I also have a route that runs unit tests.
I can run unit tests without
having to run any extra commands.
I still write unit tests.
But I usually test things
that are more or less standalone.
They can be tested without having
to mock or stub excessively.
I no longer try to unit test everything.
Another thing I want to recommend is to
keep testing tools close to our hands.
So we can use them easily.
My favorite tool now is Playwright.
I will show you an example.
I installed the Playwright extension.
I write code normally on the right.
On the left, there’s a list of tests.
When I press run test, it will open the
browser and run all tests.
The tests run quickly.
It's pretty fast.
But if I uncheck “show browser”
and press run test again,
Playwright will run many tests
at the same time.
It's true that the UI tests
are slower than unit tests.
But we can scale it.
If our system is designed
to allow simultaneous testing.
That's it. I don't have to
open many terminals anymore.
Let's look at a real project.
Someone sent me a bug report
that a page fails to load.
I tried it, and it fails for me too.
Recall number 2. If there is a bug,
cover it with tests before fixing.
I tried debugging and found that
my service worker had a bug.
I have no idea how to
unit-test a service worker.
How to import it in unit tests
and verify its behavior?
But if I write Playwright test,
I can write it immediately.
1. Go to the first page.
2. Wait until the service worker
is activated.
3. Go to the problem page.
4. Check that the page must be loaded.
I ran the test.
Before fixing it, it should fail.
Here it fails.
After I fixed it, I pressed run again.
The test has passed.
When we find a bug, if we can cover it
with tests almost every time.
I think we are in a very good place.
Without having to worry much
about code coverage.
Especially when we consider
missing features as bugs.
Every time we implement a new feature,
we will have at least one more test.
It gave me confidence
to improve the software and
refactor mercilessly.
Here’s is an example.
In this PR, I moved the project
from Nuxt.js to Next.js.
The UI is almost unchanged.
The difference is they were written
in Vue and now they are in React.
I can do this because I have UI tests.
For component tests, either it has
to be thrown away or be rewritten.
Because now it’s a different framework.
Another thing that I think
makes the system easy to test.
Is to design our service
to be multi-tenant.
In addition to making it easy to test.
It also helps when we have to
test across multiple services.
If it's not multi-tenant, when we test,
we have to deploy the whole cluster.
All services must be on the same
environment to be tested together.
But when our service is multi-tenant,
We can treat the staging environment
of each service as a private property.
Others are not allowed to interfere.
If someone want to test my service,
They can test against its staging tenant
on the production cluster.
And if there is no multi-tenant, it is
difficult to run tests at the same time.
I often see in many projects.
Before running each test case,
it has to clear the database first.
Because of that we can't run
multiple tests at the same time.
But if our system is multi-tenant, we can
give each test case its own environment.
And run them in parallel.
Then we can clear the test data
from the database at the end.
This leads us to Testing in Production.
What's scarier than
“it works on my machine”
is “it works on staging”
but breaks on production.
Michael Bryzek described in his
Testing in Production talk that
the company had already stopped using
staging because he found it very wasteful.
So he went to test on production instead.
He gave an example. Throughout the day
a bot would buy products from real stores.
3 lines of code was added.
If the buyer’s email address
ends with a certain suffix,
It's considered a test user.
And cancel the order.
This is an example of testing in
production in a good way.
For those who want to write black box
tests, I want to leave you with this.
Don't use waitForTimeout, sleep or delay.
There are very few exceptions.
No matter how long we wait, that number
will always either be too small too big.
If wait for too long, it’s wasteful.
If wait for too short, the test fails.
Instead, check repeatedly (poll) to see
if our test is ready to continue.
If there is no way to check, we can
go back to our app and improve that.
Okay, I'm out of time.
I want to say that the current black box
testing tools is much better.
And debugging UI tests is not
as difficult as before.
If we run a black box test
and find it difficult to debug,
I think it's the problem of our app.
Our app should be easy to debug and fix.
So I leave it to you.
1. Make software easy to test.
Especially if our work
involves multiple services,
Try to make each service testable on its
own without connecting to other services.
So I use the term “black box testing”,
not “end-to-end testing”.
2. If there is a bug, let it be
covered with a test before fixing.
I hope that you find some content
in this talk interesting.
For now, thank you!